!.3 release notes (#4934)
istio/istio.io: content/en/boilerplates/notes/1.3.md

## Traffic Management

> **Added** the capability for Istio to automatically determine protocol types avoiding the need for specifying the mandatory container ports field in the pod spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Added**  automatic determination of protocol types. Istio now determines the types automatically and you no longer need to specify the mandatory container ports field in the pod spec.
```

> **Added** a mode to the Gateway API for mutual TLS operation that is capable of reading certificates via SDS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Added** a mode to the Gateway API for mutual TLS operation. The new mode can read certificates via SDS.
```

> **Added** enhancements to the `EnvoyFiltier` API such that all configuration can be added or updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Improved** the `EnvoyFiltier` API. You can now add or update all configurations.
```

**Fixed** Sidecar proxy readiness checks now check Envoy's readiness status.

> **Fixed** issues with protocols like MySQL and MongoDB where the service communicates over the network first in permissive mutual TLS mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Fixed** issues present when a service communicates over the network first in permissive mutual TLS mode for protocols like MySQL and MongoDB.
```

> **Improved** Redis load balancer defaults to `MAGLEV` when using the Redis proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Improved** the Redis load balancer to now default to `MAGLEV` when using the Redis proxy.
```

**Improved** traffic management to direct traffic to the same region and zone.

> **Improved** Pilot performance.  CPU utilization may be up to 10 times lower.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Improved** Pilot performance.The reduction in CPU utilization could be up to 10 times depending on deployment.
```

> **Improved** the capabilities of `ServiceEntries` to enable the same hostname in different namespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Improved** service entries to allow for the same host name in different namespaces.
```

> **Improved** the capability of the Sidecar API to customize `OutboundTrafficPolicy`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Improved** the Sidecar API to customize the `OutboundTrafficPolicy` policy.
```

## Traffic Management

> **Added** the capability for Istio to automatically determine protocol types avoiding the need for specifying the mandatory container ports field in the pod spec.

Author: thanks.  accepted.

**Added** a mode to the Gateway API for mutual TLS operation that is capable of reading certificates via SDS.

> **Added** enhancements to the `EnvoyFiltier` API such that all configuration can be added or updated.

Author: should be addressed on line 12 of latest.  if so, please click `Resolve conversation`.  Thanks 👍

**Fixed** Sidecar proxy readiness checks now check Envoy's readiness status.

> **Fixed** issues with protocols like MySQL and MongoDB where the service communicates over the network first in permissive mutual TLS mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Fixed** permissive mutual TLS issues with server first protocols, like MySQL, where the service communicates over the network first.
```

Author: take a look at line 10.  If acceptable, please click `Resolve conversation`.

**Improved** Redis load balancer defaults to `MAGLEV` when using the Redis proxy.

> **Improved** traffic management to direct traffic to the same region and zone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Improved** load balancing to direct traffic to the [same region and zone](https://istio.io/docs/ops/traffic-management/locality-load-balancing/) by default.
```

Author: accepted.

## Traffic Management

- **Added** the capability for Istio to automatically determine protocol types avoiding the need for specifying the mandatory container ports field in the pod spec.
- **Added** a mode to the Gateway API for mutual TLS operation that is capable of reading certificates via SDS.

> - **Added** enhancements to the `EnvoyFiltier` API such that all configuration can be added or updated.

Reviewer 3: nit: `EnvoyFilter` instead of `EnvoyFiltier`

Author: addressed.

- **Fixed** Sidecar proxy readiness checks now check Envoy's readiness status.
- **Fixed** issues with protocols like MySQL and MongoDB where the service communicates over the network first in permissive mutual TLS mode.
- **Improved** Redis load balancer defaults to `MAGLEV` when using the Redis proxy.
- **Improved** traffic management to direct traffic to the same region and zone.
- **Improved** Pilot performance.  CPU utilization may be up to 10 times lower.
- **Improved** the capabilities of `ServiceEntries` to enable the same hostname in different namespaces.
- **Improved** the capability of the Sidecar API to customize `OutboundTrafficPolicy`.

## Security

> - **Added** a unified logging pattern to Citadel agent.

Reviewer 3: Think we should mention the newly added `/ctrlz` and `/debug` endpoints in these notes

Reviewer 4: sorry for the dumb q, is citadel agent used only when SDS is enabled?  If so, I suggest we organize SDS related together since it is not enabled by default.

Reviewer 3: Citadel agent is used 1) when SDS is enabled 2) when secure ingress is used (for this, the agent is embedded in ingress pod, and cluster isn't necessarily SDS enabled). Agreed we should group all SDS related updates together at the bottom of the section

Author: @myidpt @Monkeyanator @linsun I believe your comments have been addressed in followup pushes.  If you agree, please click `Resolve conversation`.  If not, please state your case :)

Reviewer 5: I'm ok with not grouping the SDS related things together, since many of the items in security are SDS related.
But I think it is more precise to make this item an "improvement" rather than a "addition". So I moved this to line 31. Please see if that makes sense to you @sdake .

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** metrics into Citadel agent to monitor SDS push.

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** the capability to ingress gateway to provide client CA certificates when using SDS.

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** the capability for trust domain validation when sidecars use mutual TLS.

Author: This leaves out an important detail that this only applies to the Sidecar resource.  See update coming.

> - **Added** the capability for trust domain validation when sidecars use mutual TLS.

Author: I htink we need one of the wg maintainers to take a look at this line.

> - **Added** the capability for trust domain validation when sidecars use mutual TLS.

Reviewer 2: > This leaves out an important detail that this only applies to the Sidecar resource. See update coming.

I don't think thats true, but at this point I think we are all just guessing :slightly_smiling_face:  -- we should get the wg experts to take a look at this whole section

> - **Added** the capability for trust domain validation when sidecars use mutual TLS.

Author: @myidpt has provided a definitive answer.  marking as resolved.

> - **Added** the labels `ca.istio.io/env` and `ca.istio.io/override`  to allow operators to control service account secret generation by namespace.

Author: accepted.

> - **Removed** integration with Vault CA temporarily. This was caused by SDS requirements and will be reintroduced in a new release.

Author: accepted.  Not sure what to do about the forward looking statement.  I purposefully left it nebulous, although IIRC the original wiki stated 1.4 or 1.5...

> - **Improved** the performance of secrets handling in the sidecars by introducing SDS.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what this is even describing? what was wrong with `Updated SDS feature to be enabled for the Istio control plane.`? It is succinct and describes exactly what changed.

Author: My understanding is that every envoy sidecar must mount secrets.  This secret mounting takes upwards of 60-90 seconds.  With SDS, this time is shorter.  Given my understanding of the feature, the above is correct.  @myidpt ?

Reviewer 2: maybe we are thinking about 2 completely different features then. I thought this was about sds support for pilot and galley etc. Oliver can clarify

Author: good.

Author: already accepted in a prior PR.

> - **Improved** security and reliability by enabling the the Envoy JWT filter by default.

Author: accepted.

> - **Improved** the reliability of SDS by requiring Kubernetes 1.13. Please be aware that while Istio supports Kubernetes 1.12, SDS [requires Kubernetes 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).

Reviewer 2: Istio *works* on 1.12, but we only *support* 1.13-1.15 by our official policy

Reviewer 3: I wasn't able to get SDS working for 1.3rc running on k8s 1.12 (could be anecdotal)

Reviewer 2: SDS does not work with 1.12, but if you don't use SDS it *should*. But Istio's official policy is 3 kubernetes releases (1.13-1.15)

Author: adjusted.

- **Added** many new istioctl experimental subcommands.
- istioctl kube-uninject -f <descriptor.yaml> The inverse of kube-inject; removes Istio configuration from a Deployment descriptor.
- istioctl describe pod <pod> Produce description of the Istio configuration affecting a pod
- istioctl manifest apply Generates and applies Istio install manifest
- istioctl manifest diff Show the the difference between two Istio manifests
- istioctl manifest generate Generate Istio install manifest
- istioctl manifest migrate Convert Helm install values to IstioControlPlane format
- istioctl manifest versions List supported Istio versions
- istioctl profile diff Show the difference between two Istio profiles
- istioctl profile dump Show an Istio configuration profile
- istioctl profile list Lists Istio configurations
- istioctl add-to-mesh add local Kubernetes service or remote services(eg: services on VM) into Istio service mesh
- istioctl remove-from-mesh remove local Kubernetes service or remote services(eg: services on VM) from Istio service
- **Improved** the istioctl experimental subcommands metrics, convert-ingress, and dashboard such that they are now supported Istio features.

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
## Installation & Upgrades:

** Added **
- [Istio Operator CLI](https://preliminary.istio.io/docs/setup/install/operator/), a convenient new way to install and manage the Istio control plane.

```

Author: please see: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xiiCWfY8NwVd4mvvaIldzgnAHbmHWAfTFnPXZw53WbQ/edit

## Installation

- **Added** experimental [manifest and profile commands](/docs/setup/install/operator/) to install and manage the Istio control plane for evaluation.

## Traffic management

> - **Added** [automatic determination](/docs/ops/traffic-management/protocol-selection/) of protocol types. You no longer need to explicitly prefix service ports with their protocol type.

Reviewer 4: We need to remove this as it is disabled for inbound ports.

**Fixed** issues with protocols like MySQL and MongoDB where the service communicates over the network first in permissive mutual TLS mode.
**Improved** Redis load balancer defaults to `MAGLEV` when using the Redis proxy.
**Improved** traffic management to direct traffic to the same region and zone.
**Improved** Pilot performance.  CPU utilization may be up to 10 times lower.
**Improved** the capabilities of `ServiceEntries` to enable the same hostname in different namespaces.
**Improved** the capability of the Sidecar API to customize `OutboundTrafficPolicy`.

## Security

**Added** a unified logging pattern to Citadel agent.

> **Added** metrics into Citadel agent to monitor SDS push.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Added** metrics to Citadel agent to monitor SDS pushes.
```

Author: accepted.

**Added** the capability to ingress gateway to provide client CA certificates when using SDS.
**Added** the capability for trust domain validation when sidecars use mutual TLS.

> **Added** the labels `ca.istio.io/env` and `ca.istio.io/override`  to allow operators to control service account secret generation by namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Added** the labels `ca.istio.io/env` and `ca.istio.io/override` to allow operators to control service account secret generation by namespace.
```

Author: take a look at @rcaballeromx 's suggestion on line 25.  if acceptable, please click `Resolve conversation`.

- **Added** SDS support to deliver the private key and certificates to each Istio control plane service.
- **Added** support for [introspection](/docs/ops/troubleshooting/controlz/) to Citadel.
- **Added** metrics to the `/metrics` endpoint of Citadel Agent on port 15014 to monitor the SDS service.
- **Added** diagnostics to the Citadel Agent using the `/debug/sds/workload` and `/debug/sds/gateway` on port 8080.
- **Improved** the ingress gateway to [load the trusted CA certificate from a separate secret](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/secure-ingress-sds/#configure-a-mutual-tls-ingress-gateway) when using SDS.
- **Improved** SDS security by enforcing the usage of [Kubernetes Trustworthy JWTs](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).
- **Improved** Citadel Agent logs by unifying the logging pattern.
- **Removed** support for Istio SDS when using [Kubernetes versions earlier than 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).
- **Removed** integration with Vault CA temporarily. SDS requirements caused the temporary removal but we will reintroduce Vault CA integration in a future release.

> - **Enabled** the Envoy JWT filter by default to improv

Reviewer 4: unfinished sentence?

**Added** telemetry reporting for traffic destined to `Passthrough` and `BlackHole` cluster.
**Added** alpha support for in-proxy generation of service metrics using Prometheus.
**Added** alpha support for environmental metadata in Envoy node metadata.
**Added** alpha support for Proxy Metadata Exchange.
**Added** alpha support for OpenCensus trace driver.
**Improved** the mesh dashboard to provide monitoring of Istio configuration state.
**Improved** the Pilot dashboard to expose additional key metrics to more clearly identify errors.
**Removed** deprecated Adapter and Template custom resource definitions.
**Deprecated** Mixer adapters. Extensions are expected to begin transition to new extension model. Legacy Mixer integration support will be maintained for 1.3 and 1.4.
**Deprecated** Deprecated HTTP API Spec. The support for producing API attributes will be be removed in Istio 1.4.

## Policy

**Improved** rate limit enforcement to allow communication when the quota backend is unavailable.

## Configuration Management

> **Added** the ability to configure Galley to use newer configuration processing.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is  useful without specifying how to enable it or what it does

Author: agree - changes in the main documentation would help here.

**Fixed** an issue in Galley where too many gRPC pings close connections.

> **Improved** Galley to avoid control plane upgrade failures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Improved** Galley to allow unknown fields in resources to avoid control plane upgrade failures.
```

The current message has no meaning... I don't think even Galley folks would know what this means

Reviewer 2: I don't know how to both improve this without going into the details though. As is, I think this essentially the same as "We made galley better - trust us" - which is fine if that is what we want.

Author: agree - I don't know what it means.  I think you came up with a 5 sentence variant of it, perhaps @rcaballeromx can help you find a home for it in the main documentation and I can link to that?

## istioctl

**Added** many new istioctl experimental subcommands.

> - istioctl kube-uninject -f <descriptor.yaml> The inverse of kube-inject; removes Istio configuration from a Deployment descriptor.

Reviewer 2: istioctl kube-uninject -> `istioctl kube-uninjected`, and for all others as well

Author: I think I have this one captured now.  please unresolve if not.

- istioctl describe pod <pod> Produce description of the Istio configuration affecting a pod
- istioctl manifest apply Generates and applies Istio install manifest
- istioctl manifest diff Show the the difference between two Istio manifests
- istioctl manifest generate Generate Istio install manifest
- istioctl manifest migrate Convert Helm install values to IstioControlPlane format
- istioctl manifest versions List supported Istio versions
- istioctl profile diff Show the difference between two Istio profiles
- istioctl profile dump Show an Istio configuration profile
- istioctl profile list Lists Istio configurations
- istioctl add-to-mesh add local Kubernetes service or remote services(eg: services on VM) into Istio service mesh
- istioctl remove-from-mesh remove local Kubernetes service or remote services(eg: services on VM) from Istio service

> **Improved** the istioctl experimental subcommands metrics, convert-ingress, and dashboard such that they are now supported Istio features.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this properly convey that we promoted these commands from experimental

Author: @rcaballeromx had suggested this and i've accepted it:
- **Promoted** the `istioctl` subcommands `metrics`, `convert-ingress`, and `dashboard` to supported features.

> 

Reviewer 6: ## Installation & Upgrades:

** Added **
- [Istio Operator CLI](https://preliminary.istio.io/docs/setup/install/operator/), a convenient new way to install and manage the Istio control plane.

## Other

> **Added** New images based on distroless base images.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Added** new images based on [distroless](https://preliminary.istio.io/docs/ops/security/harden-docker-images/) base images.
```

Author: accepted.  thanks for the link!

**Improved** the Istio CNI Helm chart to have consistent versions with Istio.

> **Added** the ability for Kubernetes Jobs to exit correctly when finished.

Reviewer 2: This is not true.... `Implemented a /quitquitquit endpoint in pilot-agent status server, which allows Kubernetes Jobs to notify the sidecar to exit once a job is complete.` was very intentionally worded. Kubernetes jobs will NOT exit when finished. Instead, we added a quit endpoint which ALLOWS jobs to exit once a job is complete IF they call it

Author: > This is not true.... `Implemented a /quitquitquit endpoint in pilot-agent status server, which allows Kubernetes Jobs to notify the sidecar to exit once a job is complete.` was very intentionally worded. Kubernetes jobs will NOT exit when finished. Instead, we added a quit endpoint which ALLOWS jobs to exit once a job is complete IF they call it. Not sure the best way to phrase this though?

please take a look at the latest text and see if it is sufficient to resolve this conversation.

- **Improved** traffic management to direct traffic to the same region and zone.
- **Improved** Pilot performance. The reduction in CPU utilization could be up to 10 times depending on deployment.
- **Improved** service entries to allow for the same host name in different namespaces.
- **Improved** the Sidecar API to customize the `OutboundTrafficPolicy` policy.

## Security

- **Added** a unified logging pattern to Citadel agent.
- **Added** metrics into Citadel agent to monitor SDS push.
- **Added** the capability to ingress gateway to provide client CA certificates when using SDS.
- **Added** trust domain validation when you use mutual TLS with the `Sidecars` resource.
- **Added** the labels `ca.istio.io/env` and `ca.istio.io/override`  to allow operators to control service account secret generation by namespace.
- **Removed** integration with Vault CA temporarily. This was caused by SDS requirements and will be reintroduced in a new release.
- **Improved** the performance of secrets handling in the sidecars by introducing SDS.
- **Improved** security and reliability by enabling the the Envoy JWT filter by default.

> - **Improved** the reliability of SDS by requiring Kubernetes 1.13. Please be aware that while Istio functions on Kubernetes 1.12, SDS [requires Kubernetes 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Improved**  SDS reliability with the requirement for Kubernetes 1.13. Note that Istio 1.3 still works on Kubernetes 1.12, but SDS [requires Kubernetes 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).
```

Author: accepted.

## Telemetry

> - **Added** support for Envoy gRPC Access Log Service [ALS](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v2/service/accesslog/v2/als.proto#grpc-access-log-service-als).

Author: accepted.

- **Added** a Grafana dashboard for Citadel monitoring.
- **Added** [metrics](/reference/commands/sidecar-injector/#metrics) for monitoring the sidecar injector webhook.

> - **Added** control plane metrics to monitor Istio configuration state.

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** telemetry reporting for traffic destined to `Passthrough` and `BlackHole` cluster.

Author: accepted.

- **Added** alpha support for in-proxy generation of service metrics using Prometheus.
- **Added** alpha support for environmental metadata in Envoy node metadata.
- **Added** alpha support for Proxy Metadata Exchange.

> - **Added** alpha support for OpenCensus trace driver.

Author: accepted.

> - **Improved** the mesh dashboard to provide monitoring of Istio configuration state.

Author: accepted.

> - **Removed** integration with Vault CA temporarily. SDS requirements caused the temporary removal but we will reintroduce Vault CA integration in a future release.

Reviewer 7: I think this is only not working with our Vault toy example. I assume if a user deploys Vault in such as way that it can authenticate the SDS JWT (same apiserver with the workloads, or it does some kind of syncing/federating service accounts between projects/clusters), then this is fine?

Reviewer 5: Let's fully verify that the Vault works with the new Trustworthy JWTs. We don't want to claim it's supported before we fully verify it's working :)

- **Improved** the Pilot dashboard to expose additional key metrics to more clearly identify errors.

> - **Removed** deprecated Adapter and Template custom resource definitions.

Author: accepted.

> - **Deprecated** Mixer adapters. Extensions are expected to begin transition to new extension model. Legacy Mixer integration support will be maintained for 1.3 and 1.4.

Author: accepted.

- **Deprecated** Deprecated HTTP API Spec. The support for producing API attributes will be be removed in Istio 1.4.

## Policy

- **Improved** rate limit enforcement to allow communication when the quota backend is unavailable.

## Configuration Management

> - **Added** the ability to configure Galley to use newer configuration processing.

Author: accepted.

> - **Fixed** an issue in Galley where too many gRPC pings close connections.

Author: accepted.

- **Improved** Galley to avoid control plane upgrade failures.

## istioctl

- **Added** `istioctl kube-uninject` to remove Istio configuration from a previously injected configuration.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental describe pod` to produce the Istio configuration affecting a Pod.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest apply` to generate and apply an Istio installation.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest diff` to show the difference betweeen two manifests.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest generate` to generate an Istio installation manifest.

> - **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest migrate` to convert Istio's `values.yaml` file into a format suitable for the Istio operator.

Author: accepted.

- **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest versions` to list all supported Istio versions.

> - **Added** `istioctl experimental profile diff Show` to show the difference between two Istio profiles.

Author: accepted.

- **Added** `istioctl experimental profile dump` to show an Istio configuration profile.

> - **Added** `istioctl experimental profile list` to list all Istio profiles.

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** `istioctl experimental add-to-mesh` to add virtual machines into the Istio service mesh.

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** `istioctl experimental remove-from-mesh` to remove virtual machines into the Istio service mesh.

Author: accepted.

> - **Improved** Promoted the `istioctl` subcommands `metrics`, `convert-ingress`, and `dashboard` to supported features.

Author: accepted.

> ## Other

Author: accepted.

- **Added** New images based on distroless base images.
- **Improved** the Istio CNI Helm chart to have consistent versions with Istio.

> - **Added** the ability for Kubernetes Jobs to exit correctly when finished.

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** the ability for Kubernetes Jobs to exit correctly when finished.

Reviewer 2: I noted this before but it make have got lost in the comments. We did nothing to make Kubernetes jobs magically work. What we did was add an endpoint /quitquitquit that a job can manually call when it has completed its work to shut down. Not sure how we would want to phrase that though

> - **Added** the ability for Kubernetes Jobs to exit correctly when finished.

Author: @howardjohn @rcaballeromx how about ```
- **Improved** Kubernetes Jobs behavior. The Kubernetes Jobs now exit correctly when the job manually calls the `/quitquitquit` endpoint.
```

> - **Added** the ability for Kubernetes Jobs to exit correctly when finished.

Author: accepted.

- **Improved** the Redis load balancer to now default to [`MAGLEV`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.6.0/intro/arch_overview/load_balancing#maglev) when using the Redis proxy.
- **Improved** load balancing to direct traffic to the [same region and zone](/faq/traffic-management/#controlling-inbound-ports) by default.
- **Improved** Pilot by reducing CPU utilization. The reduction approaches 90% depending on the specific deployment.
- **Improved** the `ServiceEntry` API to allow for the same hostname in different namespaces.
- **Improved** the [Sidecar API](/docs/reference/config/networking/v1alpha3/sidecar/#OutboundTrafficPolicy) to customize the `OutboundTrafficPolicy` policy.

## Security

- **Added** trust domain validation for services using mutual TLS. By default, the server only authenticates the requests from the same trust domain.
- **Added** metrics to the `/metrics` endpoint of Citadel Agent on port 15014 to monitor the SDS service.
- **Added** diagnostics to Citadel agent using the `ctrlZ` endpoint on port 9876.
- **Added** diagnostics to Citadel agent using the `/debug/sds/workload` and `/debug/sds/gateway` on port 8080.

> - **Added** [labels](/docs/concepts/security/#how-citadel-determines-whether-to-create-service-account-secrets) to control service account secret generation by namespace.

Reviewer 5: Reordering.

> - **Added** [labels](/docs/concepts/security/#how-citadel-determines-whether-to-create-service-account-secrets) to control service account secret generation by namespace.

Author: @myidpt can you cut and paste the entire section as you want it ordered and put in a github comment.  that is alot easier to work with then the suggested change feature.

Thanks!
-steve

> - **Added** SDS support to deliver the private key and certificates to each Istio control plane service.

Reviewer 5: Reordering.

- **Improved** the ingress gateway to [load the trusted CA certificate from a separate secret](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/secure-ingress-sds/#configure-a-mutual-tls-ingress-gateway) when using SDS.
- **Improved** Citadel Agent logs by unifying the logging pattern.

> - **Improved** SDS security by enforcing the usage of [Kubernetes Trustworthy JWTs](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).

Reviewer 5: Reordering.

> - **Improved** SDS security by enforcing the usage of [Kubernetes Trustworthy JWTs](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).

Author: please cut and paste the entire section as you desire it to be ordered, and I'll take a look.  I am clicking `Resolve conversation` on all reordering comments.

- **Removed** support for Istio SDS when using [Kubernetes versions earlier than 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).

- **Removed** integration with Vault CA temporarily. SDS requirements caused the temporary removal but we will reintroduce Vault CA integration a future release.

> - **Enabled** the Envoy JWT filter by default to improve security and reliability.

Author: please cut and paste the entire section as you desire it to be ordered, and I'll take a look.  I am clicking `Resolve conversation` on all reordering comments.

## Telemetry

- **Added** Access Log Service [ALS](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v2/service/accesslog/v2/als.proto#grpc-access-log-service-als) support for Envoy gRPC.
- **Added** a Grafana dashboard for Citadel monitoring.
- **Added** [metrics](/docs/reference/commands/sidecar-injector/#metrics) for monitoring the sidecar injector webhook.
- **Added** control plane metrics to monitor Istio's configuration state.
- **Added** telemetry reporting for traffic destined to the `Passthrough` and `BlackHole` clusters.

> - **Added** alpha support for in-proxy generation of service metrics using Prometheus.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- **Added** alpha support for [in-proxy generation of service metrics](https://github.com/istio/istio/wiki/Mixerless-HTTP-Telemetry) using Prometheus.
```

Reviewer 8: @louiscryan ^^^ ?

Author: linking to wiki's seems iinappropriate to me.  @geeknoid thoughts?

Reviewer 8: @sdake that's all we have right now. for better or worse.

Reviewer 9: please add "http" to it.

Author: @douglas-reid - wikis have no permanence.  May I suggest adding to the core documentation some simple 3-5 paragraph items for the requested links.  We will fast-track these PRs in the documentation.

Reviewer 8: We can add a section to the Operations guide, perhaps, for istio telemetry without Mixer.  @mandarjog thoughts?

Author: @douglas-reid ops guide seems like core docs to me 👍 The core problem with putting this detail in the release notes is as follows:  is as soon as 1.3.1 releases, our customers may not actually go read about 1.3.0 features.  It is far superior to document this anywhere in the rest of the core documentation, I don't care where.

This release note may be read by our current operators, but not future operators.

Reviewer 8: Here's my stab: https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4957

Author: @douglas-reid thanks - looks like that PR is coming along nicely!

> - **Added** alpha support for environmental metadata in Envoy node metadata.

Reviewer 10: @mandarjog this and the next two items will be hard for users to understand

Reviewer 10: @douglas-reid could you take a stab at rewording with Mandar being out

Reviewer 8: @louiscryan so i wrote those originally... but I can retry now too :)

Author: these release notes seem fine to me.  The problem is with a lack of information in the core documentation to link to.

> - **Added** alpha support for environmental metadata in Envoy node metadata.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- **Added** workload instance metadata into Envoy proxies. This metadata covers information previously available as attributes within Mixer. It is an enabler for the alpha support of the in-proxy generation of service metrics.
```

Reviewer 8: @louiscryan ^^^ ?

Author: too much information. Please place this content in the core documentation - anywhere will do, and we can link to that from the release notes.

Reviewer 8: @sdake i'm at a loss for where to put this in the "core" documentation. we have design docs for each of these items, but i can't imagine a section on the website for this feature, stand-alone.

should we just remove?

Author: your call.

> - **Added** alpha support for Proxy Metadata Exchange.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- **Added** alpha support for proxy metadata exchange. This feature enables Envoy proxies to directly exchange workload instance metadata (labels, namespaces, etc.) about themselves. Metadata exchange is considered an alpha feature for this release.
```

Reviewer 8: @louiscryan ^^^ ?

Author: too much information.  Please place this content in the core documentation - anywhere will do, and we can link to that from the release notes.

Reviewer 8: same as above comment.

Author: I would love to see a list of what each feature does in the feature status pages...  A landing page for all feature status pages in order.  I've spoken with @adammil2000 about this, and believe it would be a valuable pursuit.

Reviewer 8: Sure. But that's not happening for today, right?  Our previous feature status page was links to design docs.

Author: that is not happening today, that is correct.

- **Added** alpha support for the OpenCensus trace driver.
- **Improved** reporting for external services by removing requirements to add a service entry.
- **Improved** the mesh dashboard to provide monitoring of Istio's configuration state.
- **Improved** the Pilot dashboard to expose additional key metrics to more clearly identify errors.

> - **Removed** Kiali for 1.3 only. Kiali will be reintroduced to Itio as soon as [issue](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/16972) is resolved.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should say its removed. Its still there, it may just not work properly.

Author: @rcaballeromx what type of keyword would you like for BDWNF.

Author: as Kiali was sorted out, I removed line 48.

- **Fixed** Galley to stop too many gRPC pings from closing connections.
- **Improved** Galley to avoid control plane upgrade failures.

## `istioctl`

- **Added** [`istioctl experimental manifest`](/docs/reference/commands/istioctl/#istioctl-experimental-manifest) to manage the new experimental install manifests.
- **Added** [`istioctl experimental profile`](/docs/reference/commands/istioctl/#istioctl-experimental-profile) to manage the new experimental install profiles.
- **Added** [`istioctl experimental metrics`](/docs/reference/commands/istioctl/#istioctl-experimental-metrics)
- **Added** [`istioctl experimental describe pod`](/docs/reference/commands/istioctl/#istioctl-experimental-describe-pod) to describe an Istio pod's configuration.
- **Added** [`istioctl experimental add-to-mesh`](/docs/reference/commands/istioctl/#istioctl-experimental-add-to-mesh) to add Kubernetes services or virtual machines to an existing Istio service mesh.
- **Added** [`istioctl experimental remove-from-mesh`](/docs/reference/commands/istioctl/#istioctl-experimental-remove-from-mesh) to remove Kubernetes services or virtual machines from an existing Istio service mesh.

> - **Promoted** the [`istioctl experimental metrics`](/docs/reference/commands/istioctl/#istioctl-experimental-metrics) command to `istioctl metrics`.

Author: These three promoted sections look clunky in the release notes.  Any suggestions welcome - Im about out of steam.

> - **Promoted** the [`istioctl experimental metrics`](/docs/reference/commands/istioctl/#istioctl-experimental-metrics) command to `istioctl metrics`.

Reviewer 11: This list must be removed, as those commands have been demoted back to `experimental`: https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/17020
cc @esnible 

The note above above about **Adding** `istioctl experimental metrics` is still correct.

Author: accepted.

- **Fixed** issues present when a service communicates over the network first in permissive mutual TLS mode for protocols like MySQL and MongoDB.
- **Improved** Envoy proxy readiness checks. They now check Envoy's readiness status.
- **Improved** container ports are no longer required in the pod spec. All ports are [captured by default](/faq/traffic-management/#controlling-inbound-ports).
- **Improved** the `EnvoyFilter` API. You can now add or update all configurations.
- **Improved** the Redis load balancer to now default to [`MAGLEV`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.6.0/intro/arch_overview/load_balancing#maglev) when using the Redis proxy.
- **Improved** load balancing to direct traffic to the [same region and zone](/faq/traffic-management/#controlling-inbound-ports) by default.
- **Improved** Pilot by reducing CPU utilization. The reduction approaches 90% depending on the specific deployment.
- **Improved** the `ServiceEntry` API to allow for the same hostname in different namespaces.
- **Improved** the [Sidecar API](/docs/reference/config/networking/v1alpha3/sidecar/#OutboundTrafficPolicy) to customize the `OutboundTrafficPolicy` policy.

> ## Security

Reviewer 10: @myidpt can we order these items giving priority to primary user facing features and then debuggability and other maintainability related improvements

Author: @louiscryan this is an unordered list.  If you wish to reorder for highlighting that wfm.  Pleawse note, the format of the bolded is ordered as per decision in docs wg.

Cheers
-steve

Reviewer 5: @sdake Please update the ordering as below, thanks a lot.

- **Added** trust domain validation for services using mutual TLS. By default, the server only authenticates the requests from the same trust domain.
- **Added** [labels](/docs/concepts/security/#how-citadel-determines-whether-to-create-service-account-secrets) to control service account secret generation by namespace.
- **Added** SDS support to deliver the private key and certificates to each Istio control plane service.
- **Added** support for [introspection](/docs/ops/troubleshooting/controlz/) to Citadel.
- **Added** metrics to the `/metrics` endpoint of Citadel Agent on port 15014 to monitor the SDS service.
- **Added** diagnostics to the Citadel Agent using the `/debug/sds/workload` and `/debug/sds/gateway` on port 8080.
- **Improved** the ingress gateway to [load the trusted CA certificate from a separate secret](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/secure-ingress-sds/#configure-a-mutual-tls-ingress-gateway) when using SDS.
- **Improved** SDS security by enforcing the usage of [Kubernetes Trustworthy JWTs](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).
- **Improved** Citadel Agent logs by unifying the logging pattern.
- **Removed** support for Istio SDS when using [Kubernetes versions earlier than 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).
 - **Removed** integration with Vault CA temporarily. SDS requirements caused the temporary removal but we will reintroduce Vault CA integration a future release.
- **Enabled** the Envoy JWT filter by default to improve security and reliability.

Author: accepted.

Reviewer 12: Could you add one more thing:
```
- **Removed** the Mixer RBAC adapter which has been deprecated since 1.1.
```

> - **Added** a unified logging pattern to Citadel agent.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 5: Changed this to an "Improved" item.

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** trust domain validation for Envoy proxies using mutual TLS. Improved validation only applies to the `Sidecar` resource.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **Added** trust domain validation for services using mutual TLS. By default, the server only authenticates the requests from the same trust domain.
```

Reviewer 5: This sentence is still not correct. I revised it.

Reviewer 10: link to docs ?

Author: accepted.

- **Added** metrics to the `/metrics` endpoint of Citadel Agent on port 15014 to monitor the SDS service.
- **Added** diagnostics to Citadel agent using the `ctrlZ` endpoint on port 9876.
- **Added** diagnostics to Citadel agent using the `/debug/sds/workload` and `/debug/sds/gateway` on port 8080.

> - **Added** metrics to the `/metrics` endpoint of Citadel Agent on port 15014 to monitor the SDS service.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 5: This is the same as line 23.

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** trust domain validation for Envoy proxies using mutual TLS. Improved validation only applies to the `Sidecar` resource.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 5: This is the same as line 22. Removing

Author: accepted.

- **Added** [labels](/docs/concepts/security/#how-citadel-determines-whether-to-create-service-account-secrets) to control service account secret generation by namespace.
- **Added** SDS support to deliver key and certificates to the Istio control plane.

> - **Improved** the ingress gateway to [load the trusted CA certificate from a separate secret](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/secure-ingress-sds/#configure-a-mutual-tls-ingress-gateway) when using SDS.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **Improved** the ingress gateway to [load the trusted CA certificate from a separate secret](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/secure-ingress-sds/#configure-a-mutual-tls-ingress-gateway) when using SDS.
- **Improved** Citadel Agent logs by unifying the logging pattern.
```

Author: accepted.

- **Improved** SDS security by enforcing the usage of [Kubernetes Trustworthy JWTs](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).
- **Removed** support for Istio SDS when using [Kubernetes versions earlier than 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).
- **Removed** integration with Vault CA temporarily. SDS requirements caused the temporary removal but we will reintroduce Vault CA integration a future release.
- **Enabled** the Envoy JWT filter by default to improve security and reliability.

## Telemetry

- **Added** Access Log Service [ALS](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v2/service/accesslog/v2/als.proto#grpc-access-log-service-als) support for Envoy gRPC.
- **Added** a Grafana dashboard for Citadel monitoring.
- **Added** [metrics](/docs/reference/commands/sidecar-injector/#metrics) for monitoring the sidecar injector webhook.
- **Added** control plane metrics to monitor Istio's configuration state.
- **Added** telemetry reporting for traffic destined to the `Passthrough` and `BlackHole` clusters.

> - **Added** alpha support for in-proxy generation of service metrics using Prometheus.

Reviewer 10: link to docs ?

Reviewer 10: @mandarjog

Reviewer 9: `alpha support for in-proxy generation of *http* service metrics using Prometheus.` 
https://github.com/istio/istio/wiki/Mixerless-HTTP-Telemetry

Author: just to be clear, I am not linking to a wiki in our release notes.

## Installation

- **Added** experimental [manifest and profile commands](docs/setup/install/operator/) to install and manage the Istio control plane for evaluation.

## Traffic Management

> - **Added** automatic determination of protocol types. This removes the need for you to explicitly name service ports as `http` or `tcp`.

Author: accepted, thanks @rcaballeromx !

- **Added** a mode to the Gateway API for mutual TLS operation. The new mode can read certificates via SDS.

> - **Added** Sidecar proxy readiness checks now check Envoy's readiness status.

Author: looks pretty good, howe about /Sidecar proxy/Envoy?

> - **Added** Sidecar proxy readiness checks now check Envoy's readiness status.

Author: - **Added** Envoy proxy readiness checks. They now check Envoy's readiness status.

is what I'll submit as a review update.

- **Fixed** issues present when a service communicates over the network first in permissive mutual TLS mode for protocols like MySQL and MongoDB.

> - **Improved** container ports are no longer required in the pod spec. All ports will be captured by default.

Reviewer 13: Link to https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/16414 or https://preliminary.istio.io/faq/traffic-management/#controlling-inbound-ports?

Author: thanks frank will link to the latter.

Author: accepted.

- **Improved** the `EnvoyFilter` API. You can now add or update all configurations.
- **Improved** the Redis load balancer to now default to [`MAGLEV`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.6.0/intro/arch_overview/load_balancing#maglev) when using the Redis proxy.
- **Improved** load balancing to direct traffic to the [same region and zone](docs/ops/traffic-management/locality-load-balancing/) by default.
- **Improved** Pilot performance. The reduction in CPU utilization could be up to 10 times depending on deployment.
- **Improved** the `ServiceEntry` API to allow for the same hostname in different namespaces.
- **Improved** the [Sidecar API](/docs/reference/config/networking/v1alpha3/sidecar/#OutboundTrafficPolicy) to customize the `OutboundTrafficPolicy` policy.

## Security

> - **Added** a unified logging pattern to Citadel agent.

Reviewer 5: Moved this item down.

> - **Added** metrics to the Citadel agent to monitor SDS push.

Reviewer 5: Moved this item down to line #25.

> - **Added** metrics to the Citadel agent to monitor SDS push.

Author: accepted.

- **Added** trust domain validation for Envoy proxies using mutual TLS. Improved validation only applies to the `Sidecars` resource.
- **Added** the `ca.istio.io/env` and `ca.istio.io/override` labels for operators to control service account secret generation by namespace.

> - **Improved** the ingress gateway to load a CA certificate from a separate secret when using SDS.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **Added** endpoints `/debug/sds/workload` and `/debug/sds/gateway` on port 8080 of Citadel Agent for better debuggability.
- **Added** the CtrlZ endpoint on port 9876 of Citadel Agent for better debuggability.
- **Added** metrics to the `/metrics` endpoint of Citadel Agent on port 15014 to monitor SDS service.
- **Improved** the ingress gateway to [load the trusted CA certificate from a separate secret](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/secure-ingress-sds/#configure-a-mutual-tls-ingress-gateway) when using SDS.
```

Reviewer 5: I revised and moved the first two items here.

Author: accepted.

> - **Improved** SDS reliability with the requirement for Kubernetes 1.13. Istio  Note that Istio 1.3 still works on Kubernetes 1.12, but SDS [requires Kubernetes 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).

Reviewer 7: The word "Istio" is extra here

Reviewer 7: **Improved** To improve reliability, SDS requires Kubernetes V1.13 or above. Blog post https://istio.io/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Improved** SDS reliability with the requirement for Kubernetes 1.13. Note that Istio 1.3 still works on Kubernetes 1.12, but SDS [requires Kubernetes 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).
```

Reviewer 5: I split this item into two (down below). Does that make it clearer?

Author: @rcaballeromx accepted.

> - **Improved** SDS reliability with the requirement for Kubernetes 1.13. Istio  Note that Istio 1.3 still works on Kubernetes 1.12, but SDS [requires Kubernetes 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **Improved** SDS security by [enforcing the usage of the Kubernetes Trustworthy JWTs](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).
- **Removed** the support for Istio SDS when using [Kubernetes versions earlier than 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).
```

Author: accepted.

- **Removed** integration with Vault CA temporarily. SDS requirements caused the temporary removal but we will reintroduce Vault CA integration a future release.

> - **Added** SDS support to improve the performance of Envoy proxies handling secrets.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **Added** SDS support to deliver key and certificates to the Istio control plane.
```

Author: accepted.

## Installation

- **Added** experimental [manifest and profile commands](docs/setup/install/operator/) to install and manage the Istio control plane for evaluation.

## Traffic Management

> - **Added** automatic determination of protocol types. You no longer need to explicitly name service ports as `http` or `tcp`.

Reviewer 2: Can you link to https://preliminary.istio.io/docs/ops/traffic-management/protocol-selection/

Author: accepted.

- **Added** a mode to the Gateway API for mutual TLS operation. The new mode can read certificates via SDS.

> - **Added** Envoy proxy readiness checks. They now check Envoy's readiness status.

Reviewer 2: very nit - we always had readiness checks, we just added an additional one. maybe change to

> They now also check

Author: accepted.

- **Fixed** issues present when a service communicates over the network first in permissive mutual TLS mode for protocols like MySQL and MongoDB.
- **Improved** container ports are no longer required in the pod spec. All ports are [captured by default](/faq/traffic-management/#controlling-inbound-ports).
- **Improved** the `EnvoyFilter` API. You can now add or update all configurations.
- **Improved** the Redis load balancer to now default to [`MAGLEV`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.6.0/intro/arch_overview/load_balancing#maglev) when using the Redis proxy.
- **Improved** load balancing to direct traffic to the [same region and zone](docs/ops/traffic-management/locality-load-balancing/) by default.

> - **Improved** Pilot performance. The reduction in CPU utilization could be up to 10 times depending on deployment.

Reviewer 14: ** Improved ** Pilot cpu utilization has been reduced by up to 90% depending on the specific deployment.

Author: this doesn't make sense as a sentence?

Author: here is what i went with: 
- **Improved** Pilot by reducing CPU utilization. The reduction approaches 90% depending on the specific deployment.

Please click `Resolve conversation` if you are satisfied with this change, otherwise, please offer an alternative.

- **Improved** the `ServiceEntry` API to allow for the same hostname in different namespaces.
- **Improved** the [Sidecar API](/docs/reference/config/networking/v1alpha3/sidecar/#OutboundTrafficPolicy) to customize the `OutboundTrafficPolicy` policy.

## Security

- **Added** a unified logging pattern to Citadel agent.
- **Added** trust domain validation for Envoy proxies using mutual TLS. Improved validation only applies to the `Sidecars` resource.

> - **Added** the `CtrlZ` endpoint on port 9876 of Citadel Agent for better debuggability.

Reviewer 14: Replace with:

**Added** support for [introspection](/docs/ops/troubleshooting/controlz/) to the Citadel agent.

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** metrics to the `/metrics` endpoint of Citadel Agent on port 15014 to monitor the SDS service.

Reviewer 14: of the Citadel agent

Author: i have this in a followup , but i have to force push.  I am not sure why...

Author: sorted out my inconsistent repo.

accepted.

> - **Added** endpoints `/debug/sds/workload` and `/debug/sds/gateway` on port 8080 of Citadel Agent for better debuggability.

Reviewer 14: the Citadel agent

Author: accepted.

- **Added** metrics to the `/metrics` endpoint of Citadel Agent on port 15014 to monitor SDS service.

> - **Added** trust domain validation for Envoy proxies using mutual TLS. Improved validation only applies to the `Sidecars` resource.

Reviewer 14: Sidecars -> Sidecar

Reviewer 2: This whole sidecar thing is a mistranslation. This has nothing to do with sidecar resources....

@istio/wg-security-maintainers please review these docs I think a lot in security section are inaccurate

Author: @geeknoid accepted.

Author: @istio/wg-security-maintainers please review the release notes for accuracy.

Author: @myidpt has provided a review.  marking as resolved.

- **Added** the `ca.istio.io/env` and `ca.istio.io/override` labels for operators to control service account secret generation by namespace.

> - **Added** SDS support to deliver key and certificates to the Istio control plane.

Reviewer 2: nit: key -> keys?

Author: @howardjohn I almost thought the same thing but wasn't clear if there was 1 key or multiple for a certificate for the Istio control plane.  The original change request was to `key`.

Reviewer 5: There's only one private key, but multiple certs :)

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
- **Added** SDS support to deliver the private key and certificates to each Istio control plane service.
```

Author: accepted.

- **Improved** the ingress gateway to [load the trusted CA certificate from a separate secret](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/secure-ingress-sds/#configure-a-mutual-tls-ingress-gateway) when using SDS.

> - **Improved** SDS security by [enforcing the usage of the Kubernetes Trustworthy JWTs](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).

Reviewer 14: Move "enfroce the usage of" outside the link.

Author: accepted.  additionally removed `the`.

- **Added** telemetry reporting for traffic destined to the `Passthrough` and `BlackHole` clusters.
- **Added** alpha support for in-proxy generation of service metrics using Prometheus.
- **Added** alpha support for environmental metadata in Envoy node metadata.
- **Added** alpha support for Proxy Metadata Exchange.
- **Added** alpha support for the OpenCensus trace driver.
- **Improved** reporting for external services by removing requirements to add a service entry.
- **Improved** the mesh dashboard to provide monitoring of Istio's configuration state.
- **Improved** the Pilot dashboard to expose additional key metrics to more clearly identify errors.
- **Removed** deprecated `Adapter` and `Template` custom resource definitions (CRDs).
- **Deprecated** Mixer adapters. Please begin the transition of all extensions to the new extension model. Legacy Mixer integration support continues only for Istio 1.3 and 1.4.
- **Deprecated** the HTTP API spec used to produce API attributes. We will remove support for producing API attributes in Istio 1.4.

## Policy

- **Improved** rate limit enforcement to allow communication when the quota backend is unavailable.

> ## Configuration Management

Reviewer 14: Management -> management

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** a configuration for Galley to use new configuration processing.

Reviewer 14: Remove this line, not relevant to customers

Author: thanks.  Agreed, there is no documentation on how to enable in addition.  accepted.

- **Fixed** Galley to stop too many gRPC pings from closing connections.
- **Improved** Galley to avoid control plane upgrade failures.

## istioctl

> - **Added** `istioctl experimental describe pod` to describe an Istio pod's configuration.

Reviewer 14: For all these istioctl commands, provide links to the command's reference page.

Author: will do in a followon commit after this pass at the review comments.

- **Added** `istioctl experimental profile` sub-commands to manage the new experimental install profiles.
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental profile diff show` to show the difference between two install profiles.
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental profile dump` to view an Istio configuration profile.
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental profile list` to list all built-in configuration profiles.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental add-to-mesh` to add Kubernetes services or virtual machines to an existing Istio service mesh.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental remove-from-mesh` to Kubernetes services or virtual machines from an existing Istio service mesh.
- **Promoted** the `istioctl experimental metrics` command to `istioctl metrics`.
- **Promoted** the `istioctl experimental convert-ingress` command to `istioctl convert-ingress`.
- **Promoted** the `istioctl experimental dashboard` command to `istioctl dashboard`.

## Other

- **Added** new images based on [distroless](/docs/ops/security/harden-docker-images/) base images.
- **Improved** the Istio CNI Helm chart to have consistent versions with Istio.

> - **Improved** Improved Kubernetes Jobs behavior. The Kubernetes Jobs now exit correctly when the job manually calls the /quitquitquit endpoint.

Reviewer 14: Remove redundant Improve

Author: accepted.

## Installation

> - **Added** a command line [Istio operator](docs/setup/install/operator/) to install and manage the Istio control plane.

Reviewer 4: **Added** experimental `manifest` and `profile` commands for evaluation purpose

Author: @linsun do you mean to replace line 3 or an addendum?

Reviewer 4: replace line 3 s/a command line/experimental manifest and profile commands for evaluation purpose/

Author: @linsun if you are satisfied with the latest text, please click the `Resolve conversation` button.

## Traffic Management

> - **Added** automatic determination of protocol types. This removes the need for you to explicitly classify ports as `http` or `tcp`.

Reviewer 4: s/classify/name service/ as we always use `named service ports` in our docs in the past:  https://istio.io/docs/setup/kubernetes/additional-setup/requirements/

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** a mode to the Gateway API for mutual TLS operation. The new mode can read certificates via SDS.

Reviewer 4: Is there a link to this we can point to?  @myidpt  Also, is this only relevant when SDS is enabled?

Reviewer 15: It should work regardless of SDS is enabled.

Reviewer 3: nit: "You no longer need to" -> "Removes the need to"

Author: @rcaballeromx any thoughts?  I believe you came up with the original wording for this change.

Author: @incfly I have accepted your suggestion, thanks!

- **Added** Sidecar proxy readiness checks now check Envoy's readiness status.
- **Fixed** issues present when a service communicates over the network first in permissive mutual TLS mode for protocols like MySQL and MongoDB.
- **Improved** the `EnvoyFilter` API. You can now add or update all configurations.

> - **Improved** the Redis load balancer to now default to `MAGLEV` when using the Redis proxy.

Reviewer 4: include a link for maglev - https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.6.0/intro/arch_overview/load_balancing#maglev

Author: accepted.

> - **Improved** traffic management to direct traffic to the same region and zone.

Reviewer 4: Is this for multi cluster env?  Which deployment model?   I assume it is gateway connected MC model only.

Reviewer 2: Multicluster is not needed for this. Please add a link to the docs https://preliminary.istio.io/docs/ops/traffic-management/locality-load-balancing/

Also maybe add `by default` to the end of the sentance

Author: accepted.

- **Improved** Pilot performance. The reduction in CPU utilization could be up to 10 times depending on deployment.

> - **Improved** service entries to allow for the same host name in different namespaces.

Reviewer 2: Above we use `EnvoyFilter` and here we use `service entries`. So this should either be `ServiceEntry` or the other should be `envoy filter`.

Also `host name` -> `hostname`?

Author: accepted with the change to envoy filters.

Author: changed my mind, accepted with the change to service entry, see change.

> - **Improved** the Sidecar API to customize the `OutboundTrafficPolicy` policy.

Reviewer 4: can we add a link here?  https://preliminary.istio.io/docs/reference/config/networking/v1alpha3/sidecar/#OutboundTrafficPolicy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Improved** the [Sidecar API](/docs/reference/config/networking/v1alpha3/sidecar/#OutboundTrafficPolicy) to customize the `OutboundTrafficPolicy` policy.
```

Author: approved.

- **Added** `istioctl experimental profile list` to list all Istio configuration profiles.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental add-to-mesh` to add virtual machines to an existing Istio service mesh.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental remove-from-mesh` to remove virtual machines from an existing Istio service mesh.
- **Promoted** the `istioctl` subcommands `metrics`, `convert-ingress`, and `dashboard` to supported features.

## Documentation

- **Added** [Istio Deployment Models concept](/docs/concepts/deployment-models/).
- **Added** documentation for [SDS using trustworthy JWTs](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds/).
- **Added** [CNI installation and upgrade instructions](/docs/setup/additional-setup/cni/).
- **Added** the [Istio Operator installation guide](/docs/setup/install/operator/). The Operator and related docs are experimental.
- **Added** examples for [mesh expansion](/docs/examples/mesh-expansion/).
- **Added** diff generation for the Helm `values.yaml` file between releases.
- **Fixed** technical inaccuracies and confusing info from the [Traffic Management concept](/docs/concepts/traffic-management).
- **Improved** the [Getting started page](/docs/setup/getting-started/).

> - **Improved** the [Istio glossary](/docs/reference/glossary/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Improved** the [Operations guide](/docs/ops/) to improve the visibility of the troubleshooting content.
- **Improved** the [Istio glossary](/docs/reference/glossary/). 
```

Author: accepted.

## Installation

- **Added** a command line [Istio operator](docs/setup/install/operator/) to install and manage the Istio control plane.

## Traffic Management

> - **Added** automatic determination of protocol types. This removes the need for you to explicitly name service ports as `http` or `tcp`.

Reviewer 2: TODO once https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4928 is merged, link to that page

Author: @howardjohn please change the PR content to remove the "this is not safe to merge" language and otherwise tidy up the github message.

Reviewer 2: its merged, issues have been addressed. Link is https://preliminary.istio.io/docs/ops/traffic-management/protocol-selection/

Author: @howardjohn thanks will address.

Author: @howardjohn this is resolved in the latest set of commits.  If you agree, please click `Resolve conversation`.

- **Added** a mode to the Gateway API for mutual TLS operation. The new mode can read certificates via SDS.
- **Added** Sidecar proxy readiness checks now check Envoy's readiness status.
- **Fixed** issues present when a service communicates over the network first in permissive mutual TLS mode for protocols like MySQL and MongoDB.
- **Improved** container ports are no longer required in the pod spec. All ports will be captured by default.
- **Improved** the `EnvoyFilter` API. You can now add or update all configurations.
- **Improved** the Redis load balancer to now default to [`MAGLEV`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.6.0/intro/arch_overview/load_balancing#maglev) when using the Redis proxy.
- **Improved** load balancing to direct traffic to the [same region and zone](docs/ops/traffic-management/locality-load-balancing/) by default.
- **Improved** Pilot performance. The reduction in CPU utilization could be up to 10 times depending on deployment.

> - **Improved** the `ServiceEntry` API to allow for the same hostname in different namespaces.

Reviewer 2: Link to issue: https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/13008

Reviewer 2: I don't think there is no new doc on how to accomplish it, you just make a ServiceEntry with the same hostname in different namespaces. Before it did not work and now it does.

Author: @howardjohn are there docs explaining the prior limitation?  If so, the solution would be to simply remove that limitation from those docs.  If not, i'm not sure adding a link for each bug fix makes sense - atleast for 1.3 given the chaotic nature of our release notes gathering process.

Reviewer 2: There is no doc - we generally capture bugs as github issues :slightly_smiling_face: If we can't link to that then I will resolve this

Reviewer 16: > I don't think there is no new doc on how to accomplish it, you just make a ServiceEntry with the same hostname in different namespaces. Before it did not work and now it does.

Can we get a sum up of the re-solution of the main issue (google points people there)? I read the design doc + all the comments on the issue; yet I am still confused if defining SE with same hostname on different namespaces will cause problems.

The design doc is still a WIP; so is _this_ in 1.3 or not; what exactly was _improved_ here?

Reviewer 2: Not sure which design doc you are refering to, https://docs.google.com/document/d/15-PU9O22Pb0qTzCfwK2hjwNTcb-CqFuw8JnIgwK3EIM/edit#heading=h.7zgnj8bwqfld is approved and implemented (as noted here). You can define a SE with same hostname and different namespace if you have a Sidecar (https://istio.io/docs/reference/config/networking/v1alpha3/sidecar/) selecting only a single one of those for each workload.

Reviewer 16: Wow stellar speed in responding :). Yes, https://docs.google.com/document/d/15-PU9O22Pb0qTzCfwK2hjwNTcb-CqFuw8JnIgwK3EIM is the one I read. I am probably confused about `Status: WIP`.

---

> ...selecting only a single one of those for each workload.

So it won't work _properly_ using the default/stock Sidecar. Please do correct me if I am wrong.

Reviewer 2: The Status field has `approved` bolded

Depends what you mean by properly. You are setting the same thing (hostname) to two different values, so there isn't much that can be done. There are basically two options: merging the two (basically impossible in this case), or picking one of them. We went with picking one, whichever one is the oldest. If you want to select which one you want, use a Sidecar.

Reviewer 16: Oh right; it makes a bit more sense now - it was approved but later on there are no _approvers_ (`Approvers: xxx [], xxx []`) so that's what is confusing.

---

Makes sense. Thank you for clarifying ❤️ .

- **Improved** the [Sidecar API](/docs/reference/config/networking/v1alpha3/sidecar/#OutboundTrafficPolicy) to customize the `OutboundTrafficPolicy` policy.

## Security

- **Added** a unified logging pattern to Citadel agent.

> - **Added** metrics to the Citadel agent to monitor SDS push.

Reviewer 15: @Monkeyanator 

@myidpt suggests to make it more specific so that users can know what to keep an eye on, while we don't want to add separate web page name

can we list the metrics name here `citadel.xxx, yyy`. then I think that'll be good enough for tech-savy customers to plumb it through themselves.

Reviewer 3: I believe @JimmyCYJ added these metrics, but the metrics are `citadel.total_pushes`, `total_push_errors`, `total_active_connections`, `total_stale_connections`, and `total_secret_update_failures`.

Author: @Monkeyanator @incfly thanks for the suggestions, however, these sorts of details should go in the core documentation so they are not lost if operators potentially only look at Istio 1.3.1 release notes and skip over 1.3.0.

> - **Improved** the ingress gateway to provide client CA certificates when using SDS.

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** trust domain validation for Envoy proxies using mutual TLS. Improved validation only applies to the `Sidecars` resource.

Reviewer 4: this sentence reads odd.  should we move the improved portion under **improved**?

Author: thanks, I reordered this section a bit.

> - **Added** trust domain validation for Envoy proxies using mutual TLS. Improved validation only applies to the `Sidecars` resource.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **Added** trust domain validation to Envoy proxies, when mutual TLS is used. By default, authentication will fail if the client and server side trust domains do not match.
- **Improved** validation only applies to the `Sidecars` resource.
```

Reviewer 2: `- **Improved** validation only applies to the `Sidecars` resource.` what does this mean?  I don't think this is true at all @yangminzhu

Reviewer: @myidpt please try to limit the amount of information you include in the note. The goal is to make the release notes easy to consume by readers of all experience levels. Instead of adding nuance to the release note, please provide a link to the document that has that information.

Author: @yangminzhu please response to @howardjohn 's request so we can get this comment resolved.

If you feel the current release notes are sufficient please click the `Resolve conversation` button.  TIA 👍

> - **Added** the `ca.istio.io/env` and `ca.istio.io/override` labels for operators to control service account secret generation by namespace.

Reviewer 4: any examples or docs we can link to these labels?

Reviewer 15: @Monkeyanator  @rlenglet @geeknoid we have a pending PR not merged yet for this feature
https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4746

Author: documentation issue filed: https://github.com/istio/istio.io/issues/4944

Author: https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4746 is unmerged.  @rcaballeromx can you please take a look at #4746.  I don't expect we would block on this issue.

Reviewer 11: #4746 should have been merged by now. What's blocking it?

Reviewer 3: #4746 merged, resolving this.

- **Removed** integration with Vault CA temporarily. SDS requirements caused the temporary removal but we will reintroduce Vault CA integration a future release.

> - **Added** SDS support to improve the performance of Envoy proxies handling secrets.

Reviewer 4: this is confusing.  SDS has been added at least in 1.2 or earlier.

Reviewer 2: +1, I think this was a misinterpretation of the original feature. Not sure what that feature actually is though

Author: Perhaps this should be **Promoted** instead?

Reviewer 2: I think the confusion here is that we have modified this row so many times that it no longer describing what was actually changed. This came from

> Updated SDS feature to be enabled for the Istio control plane.

Right? The change was that SDS is enabled for the control plane (Pilot, Mixer, etc). It has nothing to do with "performance of Envoy proxies handling secrets"

Reviewer 7: John is right. We added control plane SDS in 1.3. @JimmyCYJ

Reviewer: @linsun @howardjohn @myidpt @JimmyCYJ Would this suggestion address everyone's concerns?
```suggestion
- **Enabled** SDS for the control plane to improve the performance of Envoy proxies handling secrets.
```

Reviewer 5: I revised it. Please take a look.

Reviewer 5: I wouldn't say "enabled" because SDS is not enabled by default (It's an Alpha feature). Maybe just use what I suggested down below? :)

- **Enabled** the Envoy JWT filter by default to improve security and reliability.

> - **Improved** SDS reliability with the requirement for Kubernetes 1.13. Note that Istio 1.3 still works on Kubernetes 1.12, but SDS [requires Kubernetes 1.13](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds).

Reviewer 4: can we clarify the requirement isn't just k8s 1.13? I believe it also requires certain configs on the API server.  Or at least point a link to it.

Author: Need SDS documentation: https://github.com/istio/istio.io/issues/4943

## Telemetry

- **Added** Access Log Service [ALS](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v2/service/accesslog/v2/als.proto#grpc-access-log-service-als) support for Envoy gRPC.
- **Added** a Grafana dashboard for Citadel monitoring.
- **Added** [metrics](/reference/commands/sidecar-injector/#metrics) for monitoring the sidecar injector webhook.
- **Added** control plane metrics to monitor Istio's configuration state.

> - **Added** telemetry reporting for traffic destined to the `Passthrough` and `BlackHole` clusters.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if either `Passthrough` and `BlackHole` clusters make any sense to our users... I think this is telemetry reporting for external services without the needing to add service entries.

Author: sounds right!

- **Added** alpha support for in-proxy generation of service metrics using Prometheus.
- **Added** alpha support for environmental metadata in Envoy node metadata.
- **Added** alpha support for Proxy Metadata Exchange.
- **Added** alpha support for the OpenCensus trace driver.
- **Improved** the mesh dashboard to provide monitoring of Istio's configuration state.
- **Improved** the Pilot dashboard to expose additional key metrics to more clearly identify errors.
- **Removed** deprecated `Adapter` and `Template` custom resource definitions (CRDs).

> - **Deprecated** Mixer adapters. Please begin the transition of all extensions to the new extension model. Legacy Mixer integration support continues only for Istio 1.3 and 1.4.

Reviewer 4: any link to point to how to transition?

Author: https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4934#discussion_r322363689

Reviewer 9: I think we should remove this from here.
We will announce deprecation separately in the workgroup, along with the transition doc.

Reviewer 8: I feel like deprecation notices belong in the release notes. It seems important to put a stake in the ground that declares Mixer is deprecated as an architectural component. Even if the next sentence is "Details on how to transition existing OOP adapters, etc., will be published shortly".

Reviewer 4: I think it is incorrect to mark deprecation without providing a path.  How can user begin transition?

> - **Deprecated** Deprecated HTTP API Spec. The support for producing API attributes will be be removed in Istio 1.4.

Reviewer 4: What is this?  can we point a link to what we are deprecating?

Reviewer 2: > What is this

That is why it is deprecated :slightly_smiling_face:

Author: https://github.com/istio/istio.io/issues/4942#issuecomment-529641235

Reviewer: @linsun Would this be clearer?
```suggestion
- **Deprecated** the HTTP API spec used to produce API attributes. We will remove support for producing API attributes in Istio 1.4.
```

Author: accepted.

## Policy

- **Improved** rate limit enforcement to allow communication when the quota backend is unavailable.

## Configuration Management

- **Added** a configuration for Galley to use new configuration processing.
- **Fixed** Galley to stop too many gRPC pings from closing connections.
- **Improved** Galley to avoid control plane upgrade failures.

## istioctl

- **Added** `istioctl kube-uninject` to remove Istio configuration from a previously injected configuration.

> - **Added** `istioctl experimental describe pod` to produce the Istio configuration affecting a Pod.

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
- **Added** `istioctl experimental describe pod` to describe the Istio configuration affecting a Pod.
```

cc @esnible

Author: accepted with minor reword.

- **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest apply` to generate and apply an Istio installation.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest diff` to show the difference betweeen two manifests.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest generate` to generate an Istio installation manifest.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest migrate` to convert Istio's `values.yaml` file into a format that suits the Istio operator.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest versions` to list all supported Istio versions.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental profile diff Show` to show the difference between two Istio configuration profiles.
- **Added** `istioctl experimental profile dump` to show an Istio configuration profile.

> - **Added** `istioctl experimental profile list` to list all Istio configuration profiles.

Reviewer 17: ```markdown
- **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest` sub-commands to manage the new experimental install manifests:
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest apply` to generate an install manifest and apply it to a cluster.
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest diff` to show the difference between two install manifests.
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest generate` to generate an install manifest from builtin profiles or customized config.
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest migrate` to convert Istio's `values.yaml` file to the new experimental install config. 
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental manifest versions` to list all supported Istio versions. 
- **Added** `istioctl experimental profile` sub-commands to manage the new experimental install profiles:
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental profile diff Show` to show the difference between two install profiles.
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental profile dump` to view an Istio configuration profile.
  - **Added** `istioctl experimental profile list` to list all builtin configuration profiles
```

Author: accepted.

> - **Added** `istioctl experimental add-to-mesh` to add virtual machines to an existing Istio service mesh.

Reviewer 4: This is not correct.  It is not only about vms.  It is adding services from K8S or VM to the mesh.

```
$ istioctl x add-to-mesh
Add workloads into Istio service mesh

Usage:
  istioctl experimental add-to-mesh [flags]
  istioctl experimental add-to-mesh [command]

Aliases:
  add-to-mesh, add

Available Commands:
  external-service Add external service(eg:services running on VM) to Istio service mesh
  service          Add Service to Istio service mesh

```

Author: @linsun addressed.  PTAL.  If satisfied. pease click `Resolve conversation.`

> - **Added** `istioctl experimental remove-from-mesh` to remove virtual machines from an existing Istio service mesh.

Reviewer 4: same comment as add-to-mesh

Author: addressed.  If satisified please click `Resolve Conversation`.

> - **Promoted** the `istioctl` subcommands `metrics`, `convert-ingress`, and `dashboard` to supported features.

Reviewer 4: would be good mention they are promoted from experimental as they are under experimental in 1.2 when user interacts with them.

Author: accepted.

> ## Documentation

Reviewer 14: We haven't traditionally documented doc changes. I don't think this is worth it, and it's quite incomplete anyway. So I propose to remove this section.

Author: I'll remove for now, if there is discord about the docs, we can address in slack.

- **Added** [Istio Deployment Models concept](/docs/concepts/deployment-models/).
- **Added** documentation for [SDS using trustworthy JWTs](/blog/2019/trustworthy-jwt-sds/).
- **Added** [CNI installation and upgrade instructions](/docs/setup/additional-setup/cni/).
- **Added** the [Istio Operator installation guide](/docs/setup/install/operator/). The Operator and related docs are experimental.
- **Added** examples for [mesh expansion](/docs/examples/mesh-expansion/).
- **Added** diff generation for the Helm `values.yaml` file between releases.
- **Fixed** technical inaccuracies and confusing info from the [Traffic Management concept](/docs/concepts/traffic-management).
- **Improved** the [Getting started page](/docs/setup/getting-started/).
- **Improved** the [Operations guide](/docs/ops/) to improve the visibility of the troubleshooting content.
- **Improved** the [Istio glossary](/docs/reference/glossary/).
- **Improved** the [Observability concept](/docs/concepts/observability/). 

## Other

- **Added** new images based on [distroless](/docs/ops/security/harden-docker-images/) base images.
- **Improved** the Istio CNI Helm chart to have consistent versions with Istio.

> - **Improved** Improved Kubernetes Jobs behavior. The Kubernetes Jobs now exit correctly when the job manually calls the /quitquitquit endpoint.

Reviewer 4: any more detail for this?  Does this mean we now support k8s jobs in the mesh?

Reviewer 2: We have always supported K8s jobs, they are just standard pods, right? The problem was that the job would exit and the envoy would keep running
